# Code Book: Getting and Cleaning Data Course Project
## About the Source Data
The original source data set from which the final data set is derived can be found at:
http://archive.ics.uci.edu/ml/datasets/Human+Activity+Recognition+Using+Smartphones

The data set contains observations from experiments which have been carried out with a group of 30 volunteers within an age bracket of 19-48 years. Each person performed six activities (WALKING, WALKING_UPSTAIRS, WALKING_DOWNSTAIRS, SITTING, STANDING, LAYING) wearing a smartphone (Samsung Galaxy S II) on the waist. 

The source data set provides two key files which contains some detailed information about the data set: the readme.txt file and features_info.txt file. 

This codebook paraphrases and supplements the files mentioned to describe only the tidy/summarised dataset as generated by the accompanying run_analysis.R script.

## The Summary Data Set
The summary data set is generated by the accompanying run_analysis.R script. 

The script combines the following files from the source data set:
- 'train/X_train.txt': Training set.
- 'train/y_train.txt': Training labels.
- 'train/subject_train.txt':  The subject who performed the activity for each window sample.
- 'test/X_test.txt': Test set.
- 'test/y_test.txt': Test labels.
- 'train/subject_test.txt':  The subject who performed the activity for each window sample.

Only the measurements on the mean and standard deviation for each measurement are extracted from the combined data set (corresponding to features with labelled "mean()" and "std()"). The values activities column from the source data set and also column names is then relabelled with more descriptive names.

The resulting data set contains 180 rows and 68 columns. Each row corresponds to **aggregated mean** of the measurements indexed by subject-activity combination. There are altogether 30 subjects performing 6 activities each, and a total of 66 features are measured.

### Index Columns
- "Subject" : Identifying the subject of the experiment (in a range of 1-30)
- "Activity": Identifying the activity performed by the subject, which are the following:  
WALKING, WALKING_UPSTAIRS, WALKING_DOWNSTAIRS, SITTING, STANDING, LAYING

### Features Columns
The features being measured are labelled according to the following pattern:  
*[domain prefix][sensor]\_[axis of measurement ]\_[measurement type]*

Where the following notations apply:
- domain prefix: 
   - Time -- The measurement is in the time domain
   - Freq -- The measurement is in the frequency domain
- sensor:  
   - Body -- the measurement is from the body acceleration signal
   - Gravity -- the measurement is from gravity acceleration signal
   - Acc --  the measurement is from the accelerometer
   - Gyro --  the measurement is from the gyroscope
   - Jerk --  the linear acceleration (if associated with BodyAcc) or angular velocity (if associated with BodyGyro)
   - Mag --  the magnitude of the signal according to Euclidean norms
- axis of measurement:  if the measurement applies from the X, Y or Z axis 
- measurement type:  if the measurement is a mean(mean) or a standard deviation (std)

Hence the column labels can be interpreted in equivalence as illustrated in the following examples:
- "FreqBodyGyro_Z_std": Standard deviation value of the frequency measurement of the body gyroscope in the Z axis
- "TimeBodyAcc_X_mean": Mean value of the time measurement of the body acceleration in the X axis
- "TimeGravityAcc_Y_mean": Mean value of the time measurement of the gravity acceleration in the Y axis

### Note: Mapping to source data
The chosen variable naming pattern described above varies only slightly to the original naming pattern, with the intention of making the names more descriptive yet remaining as compact as possible, and making it easy for the data user to refer to the source documentation for more detailed information by conserving most of the existing nomenclature.

The equivalent columns in the original source data set which correspond to the examples above are: 
- "FreqBodyGyro_Z_std" maps to "fBodyGyro-std()-Z"
- "TimeBodyAcc_X_mean" maps to "tBodyAcc-mean()-X"
- "TimeGravityAcc_Y_mean" maps to "tGravityAcc-mean()-Y"

The user should consult the information from the source data set for additional information about these features.

### Note: Typos fixed
The original data set contains a number of columns with repetitive "Body" labels e.g. "f**BodyBody**GyroMag". Instances of these are presumed as typo errors and renamed to have only one Body where found i.e. "f**BodyBody**GyroMag" is renamed to "FreqBodyGyroMag".
